OpenMP allows you to exploit
the full computational power
of a computer.
But what if that's not enough?
What if you need
more compute power?
What if your data doesn't
fit into the memory
of a single computer?
For scientific computing, MPI is
the answer, the Message Passing
Interface.
And that allows you to run
distributed applications,
applications that run
on multiple computers.
Again, just like for OpenMP,
what you'll see here just
scratches the surface.
There are quite a
number of excellent
PRACE courses which I strongly
encourage you to attend,
because they really go
in depth into this rather
fascinating topic.
We'll consider the
same example as OpenMP.
So we're going to commute pi
by throwing darts at a board.
The first executable statement
of any MPI application
should be a call to MPI_Init.
This initializes the
MPI library and ensures
that the processes
can communicate
amongst one another.
The last executables
statement would
be a call to MPI_Finalize.
And that just tears
down the whole system
and ensures that your
application exits gracefully.
We'll now discuss
some particular points
in this application one by one.
MPI is completely library-based.
So if you want to use procedures
for MPI, we have to use :: mpi.
And in this particular
case, we use :: mpi_f08--
so the 2008 implementation
of the MPI interfaces.
After the call to
MPI_Init, we can
determine the rank of the
process in the communicator.
So basically, all
processes can communicate
using a communicator--
in this case,
MPI_COMM_WORLD, that's
the default communicator.
And each process has a unique
rank in that communicator.
The ranks go from 0 to
the number of processes
in that communicator minus 1.
So we can also get the number
of processes in the communicator
by using the
MPI_Comm_size subroutine.
Again, we can modify the
behaviour of a certain process
based on its rank.
So in this case,
if my_rank is 0,
so only the process
which has rank 0
will print the
number of processes
that are used in
this application,
so my_size in this case.
Each process is going to do
an individual computation.
It defines a
variable nr_success.
And that will be
updated according
to the number of times a
dart lands in the circle
and not in the remaining
part of the square.
Each process is doing nr_tries
divided by my_size iterations.
So the total number of
iterations would be nr_tries.
And each process does its
part of those iterations.
And it accumulates the
number of successes
into its local
variable nr_success.
So that's for each
individual process.
Now the information has to be
combined for all processes.
So there is a variable
total_nr_success,
which we initialize to 0.
And that will be updated with
the values of each process.
For this purpose, we call
the MPI_Reduce subroutine.
And that takes that
local value nr_success
and the value in which
that will be accumulated
total_nr_success.
There's only one
value to communicate.
And its type is int_t.
And this is registered using the
MPI_Type_match_size subroutine.
And basically, it maps an INT64
to int_t, the MPI type int_t.
The operation which we
want to perform is MPI_SUM.
So that's the reduction.
And the result should
be sent to process 0.
All messages are passing
through a communicator.
And in this case,
that's MPI_COMM_WORLD,
the default communicator.
So now each process sends
its value of nr_success
to process 0.
And all those values will
be accumulated as a sum
into total_nr_success which
process 0 can then use.
And indeed, if we are
process 0, then we
can compute pi by, again,
multiplying total_nr_success
by 4 and dividing by
the number of tries.
And finally, since all the work
is done, we call MPI_Finalize.
We can compile the application
using a compiler wrapper
mpif90.
That will ensure that the MPI
library is correctly linked
and that all header files
are available easily.
When we run the
application, you see
that, indeed, it runs
with 12 processors,
and that we get a value of
pi, which is again reasonable.
Again, we can compute
the parallel efficiency
by running the application with
several number of processes--
so with a single process, with
two processes, four processes,
and so on.
And as you can see,
for this application
the parallel efficiency
is not particularly good.
It is even dropping below
0.4 for 12 processes.
So there is not enough
work to do in order
to offset the overhead
incurred by the MPI library
and spawning of the
processes and so on.
Writing an efficient application
using MPI is far from trivial.
But it has the potential
to scale your application
to thousands of compute nodes.